2022-10-28

# What's the deal with t()?

I recently stumbled on a project of an ex-collegue of mine [proxy-object-path]. And I thought, neat! And wow, that's an actual use for `Proxy`. And, finally, wait, why is this necessary again?

Here's a short summary of what that library does:

```ts
import {createProxy, fullObjectPath} from 'proxy-object-path';
// Arbitrarily nested complex object type
interface O {
  a: {
    b: {
      …: {
        z: string;
      };
    };
  };
}
// Object proxy for typesafe Typescript powered path specification
const proxy: Proxy = createProxy<O>();
// Transformation of the proxy object access to a string
const stringifiedPath: string = fullObjectPath(proxy.a.b…z);
// stringifiedPath -> "a.b…z"
```

How it works is that `createProxy` recursively creates a tree of proxies representing the paths into the type. When `fullObjectPath` is called with some node in that tree, it reconstructs the full path to that node and returns it as a string. Cool! So what's it for?

Translations! The standard way of handling website translations is roughly to do this:

```ts
// Typescript schema of the translations object
interface Translations {
  general: {
    text: string;
  };
}
// Fetch the translations dictionary
const translations: Translations = await fetch("/translations/en.json").then(
  (r) => r.json()
);
// Initialise the framework with the fetched dictionary
const t = i18nFramework.init(translations);
// Access translation strings based on a stringified translation keys
<p>{t("general.text")}</p>;
```

Obviously different solutions work differently and there's often a flattening step during initialisation to make translation access O(1). But the general idea is there.

So, in this context, a library such as `proxy-object-path` makes total sense, right? You get typechecked access into the translation object. You get spared typos like `t("generol.text")` and should the schema change, you know where you need to make changes. Great. Good… umm, why do we need to access the translations with a string again?

I couldn't find a general history of translation strategies or the reason for the ubiquitous `t()` (sometimes disguised as `translate()`). If I had to guess, I'd say something about the generally relaxed stance of PHP and JavaScript towards types and maybe some limitations of the OOP approaches of Java and C++. But I really have no idea.

What's clear to me though is that it's quite mad. The amount of heap allocations you make along the way is definitely insane - particularly if you want type-checked property access. Not to mention all the unnecessary function calls.

In light of all that, here's my proposal:

```ts
interface Translations {
  general: {
    text: string;
  };
}
// Fetch the translations dictionary
const translations: Translations = await fetch("/translations/en.json").then(
  (r) => r.json()
);
// Direct access
<p>{translations.general.text}</p>;
```

I know, wild! You can distribute the translations object directly across all your components, be it through React Context (or similar), exporting/importing it from a module, or just exposing it on the `window` object. Changing languages is simple, just assign a new object to the translations variable. That will make all references point to the new dictionary object. The dictionary object should probably also be frozen before being exposed to the whole application, to make sure that noone goes around modifying the global state.

If you need interpolation, write an interpolation function; you want pluralization, put it into the dictionary; you want dynamic access, that's a solved problem! It's easily extensible, because it's just JavaScript. You already know how to write that.

And, that's it! No framework, no opaque accessor functions, no gratuitous heap allocations.

[proxy-object-path]: https://github.com/MartinTichovsky/proxy-object-path
